Title: Zinc and immunity.
Authors: Prasad AS
Year: 1998
Journal: Mol Cell Biochem
PMID: 9823012
DOI: 

ABSTRACT:
1. Mol Cell Biochem. 1998 Nov;188(1-2):63-9.

Zinc and immunity.

Prasad AS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Wayne State University School of Medicine, 
Detroit, Michigan, USA.

Nutritional deficiency of zinc is widespread throughout the developing countries 
and a conditioned deficiency of zinc is known to occur in many diseased states. 
Zinc is known to play an important role in the immune system and zinc deficient 
subjects may experience increased susceptibility to a variety of pathogens. We 
have studied the effects of a mild deficiency of zinc on T cells in an 
experimental model of human zinc deficiency. We showed that T cell functions 
were affected adversely even when the deficiency of zinc was mild in humans. 
Characteristically during zinc deficiency, the serum thymulin activity (a thymic 
hormone) was decreased which was restored following zinc supplementation. Our 
studies also showed that zinc deficiency caused an imbalance between TH1 and TH2 
functions. The production of IFN-g, IL-2, TNF-a (products of TH1 cells) were 
decreased, whereas the production of IL-4, IL-6 and IL-10 (products of TH2) were 
not affected during zinc deficiency. T cell subpopulation studies revealed that 
the CD4+ CD45RA+ to CD4+ CD45RO+ ratio was decreased as a result of zinc 
deficiency, suggesting that zinc may be required for the regeneration of new 
CD4+ T cells. We further documented that zinc deficiency decreased NK cell lytic 
activity and caused a decrease in the percentage of CD8+ CD73+ T cells which are 
known to be predominantly precursors of cytotoxic T cells. In a suitable cell 
culture model our studies revealed that the gene expression of a DNA 
synthesizing enzyme TK was affected adversely which resulted in delayed cell 
cycle and decreased cell growth. The above immunological consequences of zinc 
deficiency may be responsible for decreased cell mediated immune functions in 
zinc deficient subjects.

PMID: 9823012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
