Title: Oligosaccharides: state of the art.
Authors: Delzenne NM
Year: 2003
Journal: Proc Nutr Soc
PMID: 12749343
DOI: 10.1079/pns2002225

ABSTRACT:
1. Proc Nutr Soc. 2003 Feb;62(1):177-82. doi: 10.1079/pns2002225.

Oligosaccharides: state of the art.

Delzenne NM(1).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Pharmacokinetics, Metabolism, Nutrition and Toxicology, School of 
Pharmacy, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. 
Delzenne@pmnt.ucl.ac.be

Oligosaccharides, consisting of a mixture of hexose oligomers with a variable 
extent of polymerisation, are food products with interesting nutritional 
properties. They may be naturally present in food, mostly in fruits, vegetables 
or grains, or produced by biosynthesis from natural sugars or polysaccharides 
and added to food products because of their nutritional properties or 
organoleptic characteristics. The dietary intake of oligosaccharides is 
difficult to estimate, but it may reach 3-13 g/d per person (for 
fructo-oligosaccharides), depending on the population. The extent of resistance 
to enzymic reactions occurring in the upper part of the gastrointestinal tract 
allows oligosaccharides to become 'colonic nutrients', as some intestinal 
bacterial species express specific hydrolases and are able to convert 
oligosaccharides into short-chain fatty acids (acetate, lactate, propionate, 
butyrate) and/or gases by fermentation. Oligosaccharides that selectively 
promote some interesting bacterial species (e.g. lactobacilli, bifidobacteria), 
and thus equilibrate intestinal microflora, are now termed prebiotics. The 
pattern of short-chain fatty acid production in the caeco-colon, as well as the 
prebiotic effect, if demonstrated, are dynamic processes that vary with the type 
of oligosaccharide (e.g. extent of polymerisation, nature of hexose moieties), 
the duration of the treatment, the initial composition of flora or the diet in 
which they are incorporated. Experimental data obtained in vitro and in vivo in 
animals, and also recent data obtained in human subjects, support the 
involvement of dietary oligosaccharides in physiological processes in the 
different intestinal cell types (e.g. mucins production, cell division, immune 
cells function, ionic transport) and also outside the gastrointestinal tract 
(e.g. hormone production, lipid and carbohydrates metabolism). The present paper 
gives an overview of the future development of oligosaccharides, newly 
recognised as dietary fibre.

DOI: 10.1079/pns2002225
PMID: 12749343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
