Title: [Metabolic safety of antidepressant medicines].
Authors: Łężak W
Year: 2017
Journal: Pol Merkur Lekarski
PMID: 28557969
DOI: 

ABSTRACT:
1. Pol Merkur Lekarski. 2017 May 23;42(251):210-213.

[Metabolic safety of antidepressant medicines].

[Article in Polish]

Łężak W(1), Mokros Ł(2), Karbownik MS(1), Witusik A(3), Kosmalski M(2), 
Kowalczyk E(1), Pietras T(2).

Author information:
(1)Medical University of Lodz, Poland: Department of Pharmacology and 
Toxicology.
(2)Department of Clinical Pharmacology; Jan Kochanowski University in Kielce, 
Kielce, Poland.
(3)Sub-Department of Psychology, Institute of Pedagogical Sciences, Faculty of 
Social Science, Piotrków Trybunalski Branch.

Metabolic syndrome is a very serious health issue, not only from internal 
medicine's point of view. Patients suffering from overweight, arterial 
hypertension, lipids and carbohydrates metabolism disorders are also in the 
circle of interest of other areas of medicine, including psychiatry. Currently, 
one of key problems of pharmacotherapy is a comorbidity of metabolic syndrome 
and mental disorder. Depression is more common than schizophrenia. Despite the 
fact that in everyday clinical practice there are more patients with depression 
than schizophrenia, there is a bigger interest among scientists for metabolic 
syndrome after antipsychotic drugs than as an effect of use of antidepressant 
agents.
AIM: The aim of an analysis was to review literature committed to influence of 
depression pharmacotherapy on development of metabolic syndrome. 169 results 
were provided, including 18 original publications. Final analysis consists of 9 
that investigate correlation between antidepressive medicines use and metabolic 
syndrome development (but not its each individual component).
RESULTS: In general, antidepressant pharmacotherapy is associated not only with 
increased risk of metabolic syndrome occurrence but also their worsening. 
However, it needs to be emphasized that there is a difference between 
antidepressants groups - tricyclic antidepressive medicines are the most 
commonly associated with risk of developing metabolic disorders, but also SNRIs 
and SSRIs are mentioned as significant contributors. Mechanisms of 
aforementioned changes are still unclear. However, their influence on histamine 
and serotonin pathways, which take part in regulation of i.e. food intake, is 
suggested. The search for mechanisms that are precisely responsible for 
metabolic changes continues, in hope of finding a way to avoid adverse effects 
of antidepressant medicines use.

PMID: 28557969 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
