Title: Common metabolic disorder (inborn errors of metabolism) concerns in primary care practice.
Authors: Agana M
Year: 2018
Journal: Ann Transl Med
PMID: 30740400
DOI: 10.21037/atm.2018.12.34

ABSTRACT:
1. Ann Transl Med. 2018 Dec;6(24):469. doi: 10.21037/atm.2018.12.34.

Common metabolic disorder (inborn errors of metabolism) concerns in primary care 
practice.

Agana M(1), Frueh J(1), Kamboj M(2), Patel DR(1), Kanungo S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Western Michigan University 
Homer Stryker MD School of Medicine, Kalamazoo, MI, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio, 
USA.

Inborn errors of metabolism (IEMs) are rare genetic or inherited disorders 
resulting from an enzyme defect in biochemical and metabolic pathways affecting 
proteins, fats, carbohydrates metabolism or impaired organelle function 
presenting as complicated medical conditions involving several human organ 
systems. They involve great complexity of the underlying pathophysiology, 
biochemical workup, and molecular analysis, and have complicated therapeutic 
options for management. Age of presentation can vary from infancy to adolescence 
with the more severe forms appearing in early childhood accompanied by 
significant morbidity and mortality. The understanding of these complex 
disorders requires special in-depth training, American Board of Medical Genetics 
and Genomics (ABMGG) certification and experience. Most primary care physicians 
(PCPs) are reluctant to deal with IEM due to unfamiliarity and rarity of such 
conditions compounded by prompt progression to crisis situations along with 
paucity of time involved in dealing with such complex disorders. While there are 
biochemical geneticists aka metabolic specialists' expertise available, mostly 
in larger academic medical centers, with expertise to deal with these rare 
complex issues, their initial clinical presentation in most newborns, children, 
adolescents or adults including asymptomatic positive newborn screen (NBS), 
occur in the out-patient PCP settings. Therefore, it is important that PCPs' 
comfort to recognize early signs and symptoms is important to initiate 
appropriate diagnostic and therapeutic interventions, and be able to make 
appropriate referrals. The following article reviews common IEM clinical 
presentations for a robust diagnostic differential and discuss evaluation and 
management approaches of patients with known or suspected IEM.

DOI: 10.21037/atm.2018.12.34
PMCID: PMC6331353
PMID: 30740400

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors have no 
conflicts of interest to declare.
