Title: Cooking for Vitality: Pilot Study of an Innovative Culinary Nutrition Intervention for Cancer-Related Fatigue in Cancer Survivors
Year: 2020
DOI: 10.3390/nu12092760

ABSTRACT:
(1) Background: Cancer-related fatigue (CRF) is one of the most prevalent and distressing side effects experienced by patients with cancer during and after treatment, and this negatively impacts all aspects of quality of life. An increasing body of evidence supports the role of poor nutritional status in the etiology of CRF and of specific diets in mitigating CRF. We designed a group-based two session culinary nutrition intervention for CRF, Cooking for Vitality (C4V), aimed at increasing understanding of how food choices can impact energy levels and establishing basic food preparation and cooking skills as well as the application of culinary techniques that minimize the effort/energy required to prepare meals. The purpose of this pilot mixed-method study was to evaluate: Feasibility of the experimental methods and intervention; acceptability and perceived helpfulness of intervention; and to obtain a preliminary estimate of the effectiveness of the intervention on fatigue (primary outcome), energy, overall disability, and confidence to manage fatigue (secondary outcomes). (2) Methods: Prospective, single arm, embedded mixed-methods feasibility study of cancer survivors with cancer-related fatigue was conducted. Participants completed measures at baseline (T0), immediately following the intervention (T1), and three months after the last session (T2). Qualitative interviews were conducted at T2. (3) Results: Recruitment (70%) and retention (72%) rates along with qualitative findings support the feasibility of the C4V intervention for cancer survivors living with CRF (program length and frequency, ease of implementation, and program flexibility). Acceptability was also high and participants provided useful feedback for program improvements. Fatigue (FACT-F) scores significantly improved from T0–T1 and T0–T2 (p < 0.001). There was also a significant decrease in disability scores (WHO-DAS 2.0) from T0–T2 (p = 0.006) and an increase in POMS-Vigor (Profile of Mood States) from T0–T1 (p = 0.018) and T0–T2 (p = 0.013). Confidence in managing fatigue improved significantly from T0–T1 and T0–T2 (p < 0.001). (4) Conclusions: The results suggest that the C4V program was acceptable and helpful to patients and may be effective in improving fatigue levels and self-management skills. A randomized controlled trial is required to confirm these findings.
