Title: Common questions and misconceptions about creatine supplementation: what does the scientific evidence really show?
Authors: Antonio J
Year: 2021
Journal: J Int Soc Sports Nutr
PMID: 33557850
DOI: 10.1186/s12970-021-00412-w

ABSTRACT:
1. J Int Soc Sports Nutr. 2021 Feb 8;18(1):13. doi: 10.1186/s12970-021-00412-w.

Common questions and misconceptions about creatine supplementation: what does 
the scientific evidence really show?

Antonio J(1), Candow DG(2), Forbes SC(3), Gualano B(4), Jagim AR(5), Kreider 
RB(6), Rawson ES(7), Smith-Ryan AE(8), VanDusseldorp TA(9), Willoughby DS(10), 
Ziegenfuss TN(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health and Human Performance, Nova Southeastern University, 
Davie, Florida, USA. ja839@nova.edu.
(2)Faculty of Kinesiology and Health Studies, University of Regina, Regina, 
Canada.
(3)Department of Physical Education, Faculty of Education, Brandon University, 
Brandon, MB, Canada.
(4)Applied Physiology & Nutrition Research Group; School of Medicine, FMUSP, 
University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(5)Sports Medicine Department, Mayo Clinic Health System, La Crosse, WI, USA.
(6)Exercise & Sport Nutrition Lab, Human Clinical Research Facility, Department 
of Health & Kinesiology, Texas A&M University, College Station, USA.
(7)Department of Health, Nutrition, and Exercise Science, Messiah University, 
Mechanicsburg, PA, USA.
(8)Department of Exercise and Sport Science, University of North Carolina, 
Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(9)Department of Exercise Science and Sport Management, Kennesaw State 
University, Kennesaw, GA, USA.
(10)School of Exercise and Sport Science, University of Mary Hardin-Baylor, 
Belton, TX, USA.
(11)The Center for Applied Health Sciences, Canfield, Ohio, USA.

Supplementing with creatine is very popular amongst athletes and exercising 
individuals for improving muscle mass, performance and recovery. Accumulating 
evidence also suggests that creatine supplementation produces a variety of 
beneficial effects in older and patient populations. Furthermore, evidence-based 
research shows that creatine supplementation is relatively well tolerated, 
especially at recommended dosages (i.e. 3-5 g/day or 0.1 g/kg of body mass/day). 
Although there are over 500 peer-refereed publications involving creatine 
supplementation, it is somewhat surprising that questions regarding the efficacy 
and safety of creatine still remain. These include, but are not limited to: 1. 
Does creatine lead to water retention? 2. Is creatine an anabolic steroid? 3. 
Does creatine cause kidney damage/renal dysfunction? 4. Does creatine cause hair 
loss / baldness? 5. Does creatine lead to dehydration and muscle cramping? 6. Is 
creatine harmful for children and adolescents? 7. Does creatine increase fat 
mass? 8. Is a creatine 'loading-phase' required? 9. Is creatine beneficial for 
older adults? 10. Is creatine only useful for resistance / power type 
activities? 11. Is creatine only effective for males? 12. Are other forms of 
creatine similar or superior to monohydrate and is creatine stable in 
solutions/beverages? To answer these questions, an internationally renowned team 
of research experts was formed to perform an evidence-based scientific 
evaluation of the literature regarding creatine supplementation.

DOI: 10.1186/s12970-021-00412-w
PMCID: PMC7871530
PMID: 33557850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JA is Chief Executive Officer of the ISSN, an 
academic non-profit that receives support and/or sponsorship from companies that 
manufacture and/or sell creatine or creatine-containing products. DGC has 
received research grants and performed industry sponsored research involving 
creatine supplementation, received creatine donation for scientific studies and 
travel support for presentations involving creatine supplementation at 
scientific conferences. In addition, DGC serves on the Scientific Advisory Board 
for Alzchem (a company which manufactures creatine) and the editorial review 
board for the Journal of the International Society of Sports Nutrition and is a 
sports science advisor to the ISSN. Furthermore, DGC has previously served as 
the Chief Scientific Officer for a company that sells creatine products. SCF has 
served as a scientific advisor for a company that sells creatine products. BG 
has received research grants, creatine donation for scientific studies, travel 
support for participation in scientific conferences (includes the ISSN) and 
honorarium for speaking at lectures from AlzChem (a company which manufactures 
creatine). In addition, BG serves on the Scientific Advisory Board for Alzchem 
(a company that manufactures creatine). ARJ has consulted with and received 
external funding from companies that sell certain dietary ingredients and also 
writes for online and other media outlets on topics related to exercise and 
nutrition RBK is co-founder and member of the board of directors for the ISSN. 
In addition, RBK has conducted industry sponsored research on creatine, received 
financial support for presenting on creatine at industry sponsored scientific 
conferences (includes the ISSN), and served as an expert witness on cases 
related to creatine. Additionally, he serves as Chair of the Scientific Advisory 
Board for Alzchem that manufactures creatine monohydrate. ESR serves on the 
Scientific Advisory Board for Alzchem (a company which manufactures creatine). 
In addition, ESR received financial compensation to deliver the President’s 
Lecture on creatine supplementation at the 2019 ISSN annual conference. AESR has 
received research funding from industry sponsors related to sports nutrition 
products and ingredients. In addition, AESR serves on the Scientific Advisory 
Board for Alzchem (a company that manufactures creatine). TAV has received 
funding to study creatine and is an advisor for supplement companies who sell 
creatine. In addition, TAV is the current president of the ISSN. DSW serves as a 
scientific advisor to the ISSN and on the editorial review board for the Journal 
of the International Society of Sports Nutrition. In addition, DSW is Past 
President of the ISSN and has received financial compensation from the ISSN to 
speak about creatine supplementation. TNZ has conducted industry sponsored 
research involving creatine supplementation and has received research funding 
from industry sponsors related to sports nutrition products and ingredients. In 
addition, TNZ serves on the editorial review board for the Journal of the 
International Society of Sports Nutrition and is Past President of the ISSN.
