Title: Muscle Cortisol Levels, Expression of Glucocorticoid Receptor and Oxidative Stress Markers in the Teleost Fish Argyrosomus regius Exposed to Transport Stress
Year: 2021
DOI: 10.3390/ani11041160

ABSTRACT:
Simple Summary Over the years, increasing attention has been given to welfare of farmed animals, but with a focus on mammalian species. Nevertheless, even non-mammalian ones deserve to be considered and especially fish. Aquaculture, in fact, is a globally and rapidly growing industry, since a large variety of fish is consumed every day as an essential source of protein and healthy lipids for human nutrition. However, in common aquaculture practices, such as transportation, fish are exposed to a whole range of potentially adverse stimuli which may substantially influence the welfare of the fish. On this basis, the present study aimed to assess the welfare status of meagre juveniles subjected to a 48 h transport. For this purpose, stress response in terms of cortisol levels, glucocorticoid receptor and oxidative stress markers’ expression has been evaluated. Results revealed that fish were stressed during loading on the truck and within 16 h from departure and did not fully recover even at the end of the transport. This work highlights how the procedures prior to transport, in particular, loading, may represent a potential welfare concern rather than transport itself. However, it remains essential to follow live animal commercial transportation directions in order to protect animal health and welfare during transport. Abstract Fish commercial transport is an ordinary practice in the aquaculture industry. This study aimed to investigate the effect of a 48 h transport stress on stress response of meagre (Argyrosomus regius) juveniles. Radioimmunoassay (RIA) and Real-Time PCR were used to evaluate muscle cortisol levels and to assess glucocorticoid receptor (gr) gene expression in fish muscle and liver, respectively. Presence and localization of various oxidative stress markers were investigated in different tissues by immunohistochemistry. A significant increase in muscle cortisol levels was observed after loading but a significant decrease occurred after 16 h from departure even without returning to control levels. Molecular analysis on stress response revealed an increase in muscle gr expression after fish loading that started decreasing during the travel returning to the control level at the end of the transport. Instead, no differences in liver gr expression were observed along the different sampling points. Immunostaining for heat shock protein 70 (HSP70), 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (HNE), nitrotyrosine (NT) and 8-hydroxy-2’-deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG) antibodies was detected in several organs. Notably, a higher NT immunostaining intensity was evident in skin and gills of the transported animals with respect to controls. Results demonstrated that cortisol and gr are useful indicators of stressful conditions in transported fish.
