Title: Circadian alignment of early onset caloric restriction promotes longevity in male C57BL/6J mice
Year: 2022
DOI: 10.1126/science.abk0297

ABSTRACT:
Caloric restriction (CR) prolongs life span, yet the mechanisms by which it does so remain poorly understood. Under CR, mice self-impose chronic cycles of 2-hour feeding and 22-hour fasting, raising the question of if it is calories, fasting, or time of day that is the cause of this increased life span. We show here that 30% CR was sufficient to extend the life span by 10%; however, a daily fasting interval and circadian alignment of feeding acted together to extend life span by 35% in male C57BL/6J mice. These effects were independent of body weight. Aging induced widespread increases in gene expression associated with inflammation and decreases in the expression of genes encoding components of metabolic pathways in liver from ad libitum–fed mice. CR at night ameliorated these aging-related changes. Our results show that circadian interventions promote longevity and provide a perspective to further explore mechanisms of aging. Description Timing eating and fasting for longevity Animals fed a limited number of calories, just enough to avoid malnutrition, show extended health span and life span. However, they are so hungry that they eat those fewer calories in a limited period of time and consequently spend more time fasting than do animals for which access to food is not restricted. Acosta-Rodriguez et al. therefore designed experiments in mice to control both caloric intake and the timing of their eating to see which factors were the most important (see the Perspective by Deota and Panda). Caloric restriction extended life span as expected, but it worked best when feeding was restricted so that the animals fasted for at least 12 hours and when the period in which the animals ate corresponded to the active phase of their circadian cycle. —LBR A focus on timing of feeding helps to explain how eating less extends life span in mice.
