Title: Maternal consumption of a fermented diet protects offspring against intestinal inflammation by regulating the gut microbiota
Year: 2022
DOI: 10.1080/19490976.2022.2057779

ABSTRACT:
ABSTRACT The neonatal intestinal tract is immature and can be easily infected by pathogens causing inflammation. Maternal diet manipulation is a promising nutritional strategy to enhance the gut health of offspring. A fermented diet is a gut microbiota targeting diet containing live probiotics and their metabolites, which benefit the gut and overall health host. However, it remains unclear how a maternal fermented diet (MFD) affects neonatal intestinal inflammation. Here, in vivo and in vitro models together with multi-omics analysis were applied to investigate the impacts and the underlying mechanism through which an MFD prevents from gut inflammation in neonates. An MFD remarkably improved the performance of both sows and piglets and significantly altered the gut microbiome and milk metabolome of sows. In addition, the MFD significantly accelerated the maturation of the gut microbiota of neonates and increased the abundance of gut Lactobacillus and the microbial functions of amino acid-related enzymes and glucose metabolism on the weaning day. Notably, the MFD reduced susceptibility to colonic inflammation in offspring. The fecal microbiota of sows was then transplanted into mouse dams and it was found that the mouse dams and pups in the MFD group alleviated the LPS-induced decrease in gut Lactobacillus abundance and barrier injury. Milk L-glutamine (GLN) and gut Lactobacillus reuteri (LR) were found as two of the main MFD-induced sow effectors that contributed to the gut health of piglets. The properties of LR and GLN in modulating gut microbiota and alleviating colonic inflammation by inhibiting the phosphorylation of p38 and JNK activation of Caspase 3 were further verified. These findings provide the first data revealing that an MFD drives neonate gut microbiota development and ameliorates the colonic inflammation by regulating the gut microbiota. This fundamental evidence might provide references for modulating maternal nutrition to enhance early-life gut health and prevent gut inflammation. Graphical abstract
