Title: The effect of training load stress on salivary cortisol concentrations, health parameters and hematological parameters in horses
Year: 2023
DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e19037

ABSTRACT:
The performance of sport horses is conditioned not only by the quality of its gene pool, but also by a large number of external factors. The most dominant being nutrition, quality of breeding, level of zootechnical care and the quality of the sports rider and coach. Important factor is the process of individuals’ adaptation to the training load occurring during the training itself. This study was focused on the analysis of salivary cortisol levels as well as hematological and biochemical blood parameters in relation to load to which the tested horses were subjected. In the study 14 horses of sport breeds were analyzed a all tested horses were in the same (medium) level of training load. Tested horses underwent following stages of workload – transportation, jumping training, parkour competition, treadmill training, riding training, shoeing and lunging of various intensity. Saliva samples were obtained using a tampon on a string which was inserted into horse's oral cavity, chewed by the horse and placed in a sterile tube with a closable lid. Afterwards, the samples were then stored in deep-freezing boxes at temperature of −80 °C. The EIA cortisol kit was used in this study. The absorbance was read at the wavelength of 450 nm against a reference wavelength of 620–630 nm or a blank sample. Blood samples were obtained at the beginning of the experiment, after half a year of running the experiment and at the end of the experiment from v. jugularis. Hematological analysis were carried out using automatic hematologic analyser and multiple parameters were observed. Analysis of biochemical parameters in blood serum were realized using commercial DiaSys kits and semiautomatic biochemical spectrophotometer. Sodium, potassium and chlorides were measured using automatic analyzer EasyLytePlus. In all monitored forms of exercise (transportation, jumping training, parkour competition, treadmill training, riding training, horse shoeing, lunging), an increase in cortisol concentrations immediately after the exercise was recorded, but only spotted statistically significant differences were found during the transportation of monitored horses. The levels of blood parameters were within the reference range during the experiment period. From a comprehensive evaluation of the results, it can be stated that there were no visible health changes to the horses that underwent the experimental load and that manipulation with horses is an important factor that has effect on horses’ stress response. In general, the results of this study show no visible impact of training and/or load on the health status of horses over entire 12-month duration of the experiment.
