Title: Artificial and Natural Sweeteners Biased T1R2/T1R3 Taste Receptors Transactivate Glycosylated Receptors on Cancer Cells to Induce Epithelial–Mesenchymal Transition of Metastatic Phenotype
Year: 2024
DOI: 10.3390/nu16121840

ABSTRACT:
Simple Summary Non-nutritive sweeteners (NNS) are widely used by individuals to lower their caloric intake, lose weight, and sustain a healthy diet. The specific mechanistic details of the effects of NNS consumption by individuals on host metabolism and energy homeostasis are unknown. This topic is highly relevant as NNS has been promoted as an option to improve health. However, NNS consumption has been associated with increased risk factors for metabolic syndrome (MetSyn), resulting in diseases like cardiovascular dysfunction, type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), cancer, and metastasis. This report presents a novel molecular mechanism of how NNS and natural sugars binding taste receptors transmogrify glycosylated receptors on cancer cells to induce the epithelial-mesenchymal transition of the metastatic phenotype. Abstract Understanding the role of biased taste T1R2/T1R3 G protein-coupled receptors (GPCR) agonists on glycosylated receptor signaling may provide insights into the opposing effects mediated by artificial and natural sweeteners, particularly in cancer and metastasis. Sweetener-taste GPCRs can be activated by several active states involving either biased agonism, functional selectivity, or ligand-directed signaling. However, there are increasing arrays of sweetener ligands with different degrees of allosteric biased modulation that can vary dramatically in binding- and signaling-specific manners. Here, emerging evidence proposes the involvement of taste GPCRs in a biased GPCR signaling crosstalk involving matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) and neuraminidase-1 (Neu-1) activating glycosylated receptors by modifying sialic acids. The findings revealed that most natural and artificial sweeteners significantly activate Neu-1 sialidase in a dose-dependent fashion in RAW-Blue and PANC-1 cells. To confirm this biased GPCR signaling crosstalk, BIM-23127 (neuromedin B receptor inhibitor, MMP-9i (specific MMP-9 inhibitor), and oseltamivir phosphate (specific Neu-1 inhibitor) significantly block sweetener agonist-induced Neu-1 sialidase activity. To assess the effect of artificial and natural sweeteners on the key survival pathways critical for pancreatic cancer progression, we analyzed the expression of epithelial-mesenchymal markers, CD24, ADLH-1, E-cadherin, and N-cadherin in PANC-1 cells, and assess the cellular migration invasiveness in a scratch wound closure assay, and the tunneling nanotubes (TNTs) in staging the migratory intercellular communication. The artificial and natural sweeteners induced metastatic phenotype of PANC-1 pancreatic cancer cells to promote migratory intercellular communication and invasion. The sweeteners also induced the downstream NFκB activation using the secretory alkaline phosphatase (SEAP) assay. These findings elucidate a novel taste T1R2/T1R3 GPCR functional selectivity of a signaling platform in which sweeteners activate downstream signaling, contributing to tumorigenesis and metastasis via a proposed NFκB-induced epigenetic reprogramming modeling.
