Title: The Effect of Post-Activation Potentiation Enhancement Alone or in Combination with Caffeine on Anaerobic Performance in Boxers: A Double-Blind, Randomized Crossover Study
Year: 2024
DOI: 10.3390/nu16020235

ABSTRACT:
Post-activation performance enhancement (PAPE) is a physiological phenomenon that refers to an acute excitation of the neuromuscular system following intense exercise that ends in enhanced physical performance in a subsequent bout of exercise. The scientific literature has primarily examined the effectiveness of PAPE alone or combined with caffeine (CAF) intake in all-out tests lasting ≤10 s, as the effect of PAPE is transitory. The aim of the present study was to determine the effect of a protocol to induce PAPE alone or in combination with caffeine intake on the 30 s Wingate Anaerobic Test in highly trained boxers. Twenty-five male and highly trained boxers (mean age: 20 ± 1 years) participated in a double-blind, randomized crossover study consisting of three different experimental conditions: (i) control (CON), with no substance intake and no PAPE protocol before the Wingate Anaerobic Test; (ii) PAPE + PLA, involving the intake of a placebo 60 min before and a PAPE protocol comprising a 10 s cycling sprint overloaded with 8.5% of the participants’ body weight 10 min before the Wingate Anaerobic Test; and (iii) PAPE + CAF, involving the intake of 3 mg/kg of caffeine 60 min before and the same PAPE protocol used in the (ii) protocol before the Wingate Anaerobic Test. In all conditions, the participants performed the 30 s version of the Wingate Anaerobic Test with a load equivalent to 7.5% of their body weight, while the cycle ergometer setting was replicated. Immediately following the Wingate test, heart rate (HR), the rating of perceived exertion (RPE), and blood lactate concentration (Bla) were measured. In comparison to CON, PAPE + PLA enhanced mean power (p = 0.024; Effect size [ES] = 0.37) and total work (p = 0.022; ES = 0.38) during the Wingate test, accompanied by an increase in post-test blood lactate concentration (p < 0.01; ES = 0.83). In comparison to CON, PAPE + CAF enhanced mean power (p = 0.001; ES = 0.57), peak power (p = 0.013; ES = 0.57), total work (p = 0.001; ES = 0.53), post-test blood lactate concentration (p < 0.001; ES = 1.43) and participants’ subjective perception of power (p = 0.041). There were no differences in any variable between PAPE + PLA and PAPE + CAF. In summary, a PAPE protocol that involves a 10 s all-out sprint 10 min before the Wingate Anaerobic Test was effective in enhancing Wingate mean power in highly trained boxers. The addition of 3 mg/kg of caffeine to the PAPE protocol produced an effect on mean power of a higher magnitude than PAPE alone, and it enhanced peak power along with participants’ subjective perception of power. From a practical point of view, PAPE before exercise seems to be an effective approach for increasing Wingate performance in highly trained boxers, while the addition of caffeine can increase some benefits, especially peak power.
