Title: Intermittent fasting strategies and their effects on body weight and other cardiometabolic risk factors: systematic review and network meta-analysis of randomised clinical trials.
Authors: Semnani-Azad Z
Year: 2025
Journal: BMJ
PMID: 40533200
DOI: 10.1136/bmj-2024-082007

ABSTRACT:
1. BMJ. 2025 Jun 18;389:e082007. doi: 10.1136/bmj-2024-082007.

Intermittent fasting strategies and their effects on body weight and other 
cardiometabolic risk factors: systematic review and network meta-analysis of 
randomised clinical trials.

Semnani-Azad Z(1), Khan TA(2)(3), Chiavaroli L(2)(3), Chen V(2)(3), Bhatt HA(4), 
Chen A(4), Chiang N(4), Oguntala J(4), Kabisch S(5)(6), Lau DC(7), Wharton S(8), 
Sharma AM(9), Harris L(10), Leiter LA(2)(3)(4)(11)(12), Hill JO(13), Hu 
FB(1)(14)(15), Lean ME(10), Kahleová H(16), Rahelic D(17), Salas-Salvadó J(18), 
Kendall CW(2)(3)(19), Sievenpiper JL(20)(3)(4)(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutrition, Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(2)Department of Nutritional Sciences, Temerty Faculty of Medicine, University 
of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)Toronto 3D Knowledge Synthesis and Clinical Trials Unit, Clinical Nutrition 
and Risk Factor Modification Centre, St Michael's Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(4)Temerty Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(5)Charité Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany.
(6)German Center for Diabetes Research, Neuherberg, Germany.
(7)Department of Medicine and Biochemistry, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, 
Canada.
(8)Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(9)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Alberta, Edmonton, 
AB, Canada.
(10)Human Nutrition, School of Medicine, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, 
Scotland, UK.
(11)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, St Michael's Hospital, Toronto, 
ON, Canada.
(12)Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, St Michael's Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(13)Department of Nutrition Sciences, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 
Birmingham, Alabama, USA.
(14)Department of Epidemiology, Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health, Boston, 
MA, USA.
(15)Department of Biostatistics, Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(16)Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine, Washington, DC, USA.
(17)Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Diabetes, Merkur University 
Hospital, Zagreb, Croatia.
(18)Human Nutrition Unit, Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Institut 
d'Investigació Sanitaria Pere i Virgili, Universitat Rovira i Virgili, Reus, 
Spain.
(19)College of Pharmacy and Nutrition, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, 
SK, Canada.
(20)Department of Nutritional Sciences, Temerty Faculty of Medicine, University 
of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada john.sievenpiper@utoronto.ca.

Erratum in
    BMJ. 2025 Aug 18;390:r1737. doi: 10.1136/bmj.r1737.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the effect of intermittent fasting diets, with continuous 
energy restriction or unrestricted (ad-libitum) diets on intermediate 
cardiometabolic outcomes from randomised clinical trials.
DESIGN: Systematic review and network meta-analysis.
DATA SOURCES: Medline, Embase, and central databases from inception to 14 
November 2024.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR SELECTING STUDIES: Randomised clinical trials comparing 
the association of intermittent fasting diets (alternate day fasting, time 
restricted eating, and whole day fasting), continuous energy restriction, and 
ad-libitum diets were included.
MAIN OUTCOMES: Outcomes included body weight (primary) and measures of 
anthropometry, glucose metabolism, lipid profiles, blood pressure, C-reactive 
protein, and markers of liver disease.
DATA SYNTHESIS: A network meta-analysis based on a frequentist framework was 
performed with data expressed as mean difference with 95% confidence intervals 
(CIs). The certainty of the evidence was assessed using grading of 
recommendations assessment, development, and evaluation (GRADE).
RESULTS: 99 randomised clinical trials involving 6582 adults of varying health 
conditions (720 healthy, 5862 existing health conditions) were identified. All 
intermittent fasting and continuous energy restriction diet strategies reduced 
body weight when compared with ad-libitum diet. Compared with continuous energy 
restriction, alternate day fasting was the only form of intermittent fasting 
diet strategy to show benefit in body weight reduction (mean difference -1.29 kg 
(95% CI -1.99 to -0.59), moderate certainty of evidence). Additionally, 
alternate day fasting showed a trivial reduction in body weight compared with 
both time restricted eating and whole day fasting (mean difference -1.69 kg 
(-2.49 to -0.88) and -1.05 kg (-1.90 to -0.19), respectively, both with moderate 
certainty of evidence). Estimates were similar among trials with less than 24 
weeks follow-up (n=76); however, moderate-to-long-term trials (≥24 weeks, n=17) 
only showed benefits in weight reduction in diet strategies compared with 
ad-libitum. Furthermore, in comparisons between intermittent fasting strategies, 
alternate day fasting lowered total cholesterol, triglycerides, and non-high 
density lipoprotein compared with time restricted eating. Compared with whole 
day fasting, however, time restricted eating resulted in a small increase in 
total cholesterol, low density lipoprotein cholesterol, and non-high density 
lipoprotein cholesterol. No differences were noted between intermittent fasting, 
continuous energy restriction, and ad-libitum diets for HbA1c and high density 
lipoprotein.
CONCLUSIONS: Minor differences were noted between some intermittent fasting 
diets and continuous energy restriction, with some benefit of weight loss with 
alternate day fasting in shorter duration trials. The current evidence provides 
some indication that intermittent fasting diets have similar benefits to 
continuous energy restriction for weight loss and cardiometabolic risk factors. 
Longer duration trials are needed to further substantiate these findings.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT05309057.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2019. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmj-2024-082007
PMCID: PMC12175170
PMID: 40533200 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: All authors have completed 
the ICMJE uniform disclosure form at www.icmje.org/disclosure-of-interest/ and 
declare: TAK has received research support from the CIHR, the International Life 
Science Institute and National Honey Board. He has been an invited speaker at 
the Calorie Control Council Annual meeting for which he has received an 
honorarium. LC held a Mitacs-Elevate post-doctoral fellowship jointly funded by 
the Government of Canada and the Canadian Sugar Institute (2019-2021). She was 
employed as a casual clinical coordinator at INQUIS Clinical Research, Ltd. 
(formerly Glycemic Index Laboratories, Inc), a contract research organization 
(until 2019). She has received research funding from the Canadian Institutes of 
Health Research (CIHR), Protein Industries Canada (a Government of Canada Global 
Innovation Cluster), the United Soybean Board (The United States Department of 
Agriculture Soybean “Check-off” Program), and the Alberta Pulse Growers. She has 
received honoraria from the Arkansas Children’s Hospital and travel funding from 
the World Sugars Research Organization for an internal presentation in 2022. SK 
received grants by the German Center for Diabetes Research (DZD), the German 
Diabetes Association, the Almond Board of California, the California Walnut 
Commission, the Wilhelm-Doerenkamp-Foundation. DCWL reports clinical research 
grant funding from Novo Nordisk. He serves on advisory boards for Amgen, Bayer, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, HLS Therapeutics, Eli Lilly, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, 
Pfizer, and Viatris. He serves on speaker bureaus for Amgen, Bayer, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, CME at Sea, HLS Therapeutics, Eli Lilly, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, and 
Obesity Canada. He is the founder of Obesity Canada and a member of the board of 
directors of Canadian Association of Bariatric Physicians and Surgeons for no 
remuneration. JOH reports speaker fees from Eli Lilly. He serves as a member of 
the scientific advisory board for General Mills. ML reports membership of the 
Arctic Clum and the Alpine Club, departmental research support from National 
Institute for Health Research (NIHR), Novo Nordisk Diabetes UK, and All Saints 
Educational Trust, outside the submitted work, lecturing fees from Novo Nordisk, 
Eli Lilly, Nestle, and Oviva, and has provided clinical consultancy to the 
Government of Bermuda, the Ombudsman of Northern Ireland, and Counterweight Ltd, 
with fees paid to the University of Glasgow. SW has been involved in honoraria, 
ad boards, or clinical trials for Novo Nordisk Inc, Bausch Health Canada, Eli 
Lilly, and Boehringer Engelheim. DR is director of Vuk Vrhovac University Clinic 
for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases at Merkur University 
Hospital, Zagreb, Croatia. He is the president of Croatian Society for Diabetes 
and Metabolic Disorders of Croatian Medical Association. He serves as an 
executive committee member of Croatian Endocrine Society, Croatian Society for 
Obesity and Croatian Society for Endocrine Oncology. He was a board member and 
secretary of International Diabetes Federation (IDF) Europe and currently he is 
the chair of the IDF Young Leaders in Diabetes Programme. He has served as an 
executive committee member of the Diabetes and Nutrition Study Group of European 
Association of the Study of Diabetes (EASD) and currently he serves as an 
executive committee member of Diabetes and Cardiovascular Disease Study Group of 
EASD. He has served as principal investigator or coinvestigator in clinical 
trials of AstraZeneca, Eli Lilly, MSD, Novo Nordisk, Sanofi Aventis, Solvay, and 
Trophos. He has received travel support, speaker fees, and honoraria from 
advisory board engagements and consulting fees from Abbott, Amgen, AstraZeneca, 
Bayer, Belupo, Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, Lifescan – Johnson and Johnson, 
International Sweeteners Association, Krka, Medtronic, Mediligo, Mylan, 
Novartis, Novo Nordisk, MSD, Merck Sharp and Dohme, Pfizer, Pliva, Roche, 
Salvus, Sandoz, Solvay, Sanofi Aventis, and Takeda. JS-S is on the Clinical 
Practice Guidelines Expert Committee of EASD and served in the Scientific 
Committee of the Spanish Food and Safety Agency and the Spanish Federation of 
the Scientific Societies of Food, Nutrition and Dietetics. He is a member of the 
International Carbohydrate Quality Consortium (ICQC) and Executive Board Member 
of the Diabetes and Nutrition Study Group (DNSG) of the EASD, and has received 
research support from the Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Spain, Ministerio de 
Educación y Ciencia, Spain, Departament de Salut Pública de la Generalitat de 
Catalunya, Catalonia, Spain, and the European Commission. Reported receiving 
personal fees from Instituto Danone Spain. Received financial support to the 
institution from the International Nut and Dried Fruit Council Foundation, 
Fundación Eroski. He is a non-paid member of the International Danone Institute 
and received travel expenses form this institution. CWCK has received grants or 
research support from the Advanced Food Materials Network, Agriculture and 
Agri-Foods Canada (AAFC), Almond Board of California, Barilla, Canadian 
Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), Canola Council of Canada, International 
Nut and Dried Fruit Council, International Tree Nut Council Research and 
Education Foundation, Loblaw Brands Ltd, the Peanut Institute, Pulse Canada, and 
Unilever. He has received in-kind research support from the Almond Board of 
California, Barilla, California Walnut Commission, Kellogg Canada, Loblaw 
Companies, Nutrartis, Quaker (PepsiCo), the Peanut Institute, Primo, Unico, 
Unilever, and WhiteWave Foods/Danone. He has received travel support and/or 
honoraria from the Barilla, California Walnut Commission, Canola Council of 
Canada, General Mills, International Nut and Dried Fruit Council, International 
Pasta Organization, Lantmannen, Loblaw Brands Ltd, Nutrition Foundation of 
Italy, Oldways Preservation Trust, Paramount Farms, the Peanut Institute, Pulse 
Canada, Sun-Maid, Tate & Lyle, Unilever, and White Wave Foods/Danone. He has 
served on the scientific advisory board for the International Tree Nut Council, 
International Pasta Organization, McCormick Science Institute, and Oldways 
Preservation Trust. He is a founding member of the International Carbohydrate 
Quality Consortium (ICQC), Executive Board Member of the DNSG of the EASD, is on 
the Clinical Practice Guidelines Expert Committee for Nutrition Therapy of the 
EASD and is a Director of the Toronto 3D Knowledge Synthesis and Clinical Trials 
foundation. JLS has received research support from the Canadian Foundation for 
Innovation, Ontario Research Fund, Province of Ontario Ministry of Research and 
Innovation and Science, Canadian Institutes of health Research (CIHR), Diabetes 
Canada, American Society for Nutrition (ASN), National Honey Board (U.S. 
Department of Agriculture (USDA) honey “Checkoff” program), Institute for the 
Advancement of Food and Nutrition Sciences (IAFNS), Pulse Canada, Quaker Oats 
Center of Excellence, INC International Nut and Dried Fruit Council Foundation, 
The United Soybean Board (USDA soy “Checkoff” program), Protein Industries 
Canada (a Government of Canada Global Innovation Cluster), Almond Board of 
California, European Fruit Juice Association, The Tate and Lyle Nutritional 
Research Fund at the University of Toronto, The Glycemic Control and 
Cardiovascular Disease in Type 2 Diabetes Fund at the University of Toronto (a 
fund established by the Alberta Pulse Growers), The Plant Protein Fund at the 
University of Toronto (a fund which has received contributions from IFF among 
other donors), The Plant Milk Fund at the University of Toronto (a fund 
established by the Karuna Foundation through Vegan Grants), and The Nutrition 
Trialists Network Fund at the University of Toronto (a fund established by 
donations from the Calorie Control Council, Physicians Committee for Responsible 
Medicine, and Login5 Foundation). He has received food donations to support 
randomised controlled trials from the Almond Board of California, California 
Walnut Commission, Danone, Nutrartis, Soylent, and Dairy Farmers of Canada. He 
has received travel support, speaker fees and/or honoraria from FoodMinds LLC, 
Nestlé, Abbott, General Mills, Nutrition Communications, International Food 
Information Council (IFIC), Arab Beverage Association, International Sweeteners 
Association, Calorie Control Council, Phynova, and Collaborative CME and 
Research Network (CCRN). He has or has had ad hoc consulting arrangements with 
Almond Board of California, Perkins Coie LLP, Tate & Lyle, Ingredion, and 
Brightseed. He is on the Clinical Practice Guidelines Expert Committees of 
Diabetes Canada, EASD, Canadian Cardiovascular Society (CCS), and Obesity 
Canada/Canadian Association of Bariatric Physicians and Surgeons. He serves as 
an unpaid member of the Board of Trustees of IAFNS. He is a Director at Large of 
the Canadian Nutrition Society (CNS), founding member of the International 
Carbohydrate Quality Consortium (ICQC), Executive Board Member of the DNSG of 
the EASD, and Director of the Toronto 3D Knowledge Synthesis and Clinical Trials 
foundation. His spouse is a former employee of Nestle Health Science and AB 
InBev; no other relationships or activities that could appear to have influenced 
the submitted work. All other authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.
