Title: Invited Mini Review Metabolic Bone Disease of Prematurity: Overview and Practice Recommendations.
Authors: Grover M
Year: 2025
Journal: Horm Res Paediatr
PMID: 38211570
DOI: 10.1159/000536228

ABSTRACT:
1. Horm Res Paediatr. 2025;98(1):40-50. doi: 10.1159/000536228. Epub 2024 Jan 11.

Invited Mini Review Metabolic Bone Disease of Prematurity: Overview and Practice 
Recommendations.

Grover M(1), Ashraf AP(2), Bowden SA(3), Calabria A(4), Diaz-Thomas A(5), 
Krishnan S(6), Miller JL(7), Robinson ME(8), DiMeglio LA(9).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, Stanford 
School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA.
(2)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, USA.
(3)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, Nationwide 
Children's Hospital/The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(4)Division of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Department of Pediatrics, The 
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(5)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, Tennessee, USA.
(6)Section of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, University 
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.
(7)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern 
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(8)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Ottawa, and The Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, 
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(9)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology/Diabetology, Department of Pediatrics, 
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.

Metabolic bone disease of prematurity (MBDP) is defined by undermineralization 
of the preterm infant skeleton arising from inadequate prenatal and postnatal 
calcium (Ca) and phosphate (PO4) accretion. Severe MBDP can be associated with 
rickets and fractures. Despite advances in neonatal nutrition, MBDP remains 
prevalent in premature infants due to inadequate mineral accretion ex utero. 
There also remain significant knowledge gaps regarding best practices for 
monitoring and treatment of MBDP among neonatologists and pediatric 
endocrinologists. Preventing and treating MBDP can prevent serious consequences 
including rickets or pathologic fractures. Postnatal monitoring to facilitate 
early recognition of MBDP is best done by first-tier laboratory screening by 
measuring serum Ca, phosphorus, and alkaline phosphatase to identify infants at 
risk. If these laboratories are abnormal, further studies including assessing 
parathyroid hormone and/or tubular resorption of PO4 can help differentiate 
between Ca and PO4 deficiency as primary etiologies to guide appropriate 
treatment with mineral supplements. Additional research into optimal mineral 
supplementation for the prevention and treatment of MBDP is needed to improve 
long-term bone health outcomes and provide a fuller evidence base for future 
treatment guidelines. Metabolic bone disease of prematurity (MBDP) is defined by 
undermineralization of the preterm infant skeleton arising from inadequate 
prenatal and postnatal calcium (Ca) and phosphate (PO4) accretion. Severe MBDP 
can be associated with rickets and fractures. Despite advances in neonatal 
nutrition, MBDP remains prevalent in premature infants due to inadequate mineral 
accretion ex utero. There also remain significant knowledge gaps regarding best 
practices for monitoring and treatment of MBDP among neonatologists and 
pediatric endocrinologists. Preventing and treating MBDP can prevent serious 
consequences including rickets or pathologic fractures. Postnatal monitoring to 
facilitate early recognition of MBDP is best done by first-tier laboratory 
screening by measuring serum Ca, phosphorus, and alkaline phosphatase to 
identify infants at risk. If these laboratories are abnormal, further studies 
including assessing parathyroid hormone and/or tubular resorption of PO4 can 
help differentiate between Ca and PO4 deficiency as primary etiologies to guide 
appropriate treatment with mineral supplements. Additional research into optimal 
mineral supplementation for the prevention and treatment of MBDP is needed to 
improve long-term bone health outcomes and provide a fuller evidence base for 
future treatment guidelines.

© 2024 The Author(s). Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000536228
PMCID: PMC11854976
PMID: 38211570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Jennifer L. Miller’s spouse is majority owner of 
Element Bars, Inc., a snack food company. Jennifer L Miller has served on an 
advisory board for Ipsen Biopharmaceuticals. The remaining authors have no 
conflicts of interest to declare.
