Title: Probiotics and Food Bioactives: Unraveling Their Impact on Gut Microbiome, Inflammation, and Metabolic Health.
Year: 2025
DOI: 10.1007/s12602-025-10452-2

ABSTRACT:
1. Probiotics Antimicrob Proteins. 2025 Aug;17(4):1851-1892. doi: 
10.1007/s12602-025-10452-2. Epub 2025 Jan 14.

Probiotics and Food Bioactives: Unraveling Their Impact on Gut Microbiome, 
Inflammation, and Metabolic Health.

Mafe AN(1), Iruoghene Edo G(2)(3), Akpoghelie PO(4), Gaaz TS(5), Yousif E(6), 
Zainulabdeen K(6), Isoje EF(7), Igbuku UA(8), Opiti RA(9), Garba Y(10), Essaghah 
AEA(11), Ahmed DS(12), Umar H(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science, Taraba State 
University Jalingo, Jalingo, Taraba State, Nigeria.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Delta State University of 
Science and Technology, Ozoro, Nigeria. greatiruo@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Chemistry, College of Sciences, Al-Nahrain University, Baghdad, 
Iraq. greatiruo@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Food Science and Technology, Faculty of Science, Delta State 
University of Science and Technology, Ozoro, Delta State, Nigeria.
(5)Department of Prosthetics and Orthotics Engineering, College of Engineering 
and Technologies, Al-Mustaqbal University, Babylon, Iraq.
(6)Department of Chemistry, College of Sciences, Al-Nahrain University, Baghdad, 
Iraq.
(7)Department of Science Laboratory Technology (Biochemistry Option), Faculty of 
Science, Delta State University of Science and Technology, Ozoro, Nigeria.
(8)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Delta State University of 
Science and Technology, Ozoro, Nigeria.
(9)Department of Petroleum Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Delta State University 
of Science and Technology, Ozoro, Nigeria.
(10)Department of Information Engineering, College of Information Engineering, 
Al-Nahrain University, Baghdad, Iraq.
(11)Department of Urban and Regional Planning, Faculty of Environmental 
Sciences, Delta State University of Science and Technology, Ozoro, Nigeria.
(12)Department of Chemical Industries, Institute of Technology-Baghdad, Middle 
Technical University, Baghdad, Iraq.
(13)Operational Research Centre in Healthcare, Near East University, Nicosia, 
Cyprus.

This review paper delves into the role of probiotics and food bioactives in 
influencing gut health and overall well-being, within the context of probiotics 
and food bioactives, emphasizing their roles in modulating inflammation, gut 
microbiota, and metabolic health. Probiotics are defined as live microorganisms 
that confer health benefits to the host, primarily through their impact on the 
gut microbiome; a complex community of microorganisms crucial for maintaining 
health. The review aims to elucidate how probiotics, incorporated into both 
traditional and modern food systems, can enhance gut health and address 
metabolic disorders. It examines the types of probiotics present in various 
foods and their mechanisms of action, including their effects on immune function 
and metabolic health. By exploring the links between probiotics and health 
outcomes such as digestive health, immune support, and mental health, the review 
identifies specific conditions where probiotics show significant promise. 
Hurldes such as inconsistencies in research findings, variability in probiotic 
strains, and dosages are addressed. The paper also suggests future research 
directions, including the potential for personalized probiotic interventions. 
The review concludes by summarizing key findings and emphasizing the critical 
role of probiotics in food systems for promoting overall health and mitigating 
metabolic diseases.

© 2025. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12602-025-10452-2
PMID: 39808399 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics Approval and Consent to 
Participate: Not applicable. Consent for Publication: Not applicable. Conflict 
of Interest: The authors declare no competing interests.
